man page for hp2graph
 1 January 1994
(18 April   1992 original)


        hp2graph - convert a heap profile to a PostScript/Mif/Draw  graph

hp2graph [flags] [file]

 The program hp2graph converts a heap profile stored in file into a
graph , sending the result to "file.Type" where Type is one of
"ps","mif" or "draw". Files to be processed by hp2graph must have a
.hp extension, but the extension shoudl _not_ be given on the command
line. The program can be used as a filter if the file is replced by a
dash.


        OPTIONS
 The flags are:

'-b'
  Change a life time  profile into a biograpfical profile.

'-bvoid' '-buse' '-bdrag' '-blag'
 Only keep cells that are in one of the given phases.  These flags are
legal only if enough information is available in the hp-file.

'-c'
 Ignore profiling comments in the hp-file.

'-d'
 Sort on deviation. (Not supported anymore.)

'-e' float [in|mm|pt]'
 If the output format is PostScript then the output will be in 
 encapsulated PostScript suitable for inclusion in LaTeX documents.
Usually, the PostScript graph is drawn in landscape mode in an area 9
inches wide by 6 inches high, and hp2graph arranges for this area to
be approximately centered on a sheet of a4 paper. This format is
convenient of studying the graph in detail, but it is unsuitable for
inclusion in LaTeX documents. The '-e' option causes the graph to be
drawn in portrait mode, with float specifying the width in inches,
millimetres or points (the default). The resulting PostScript file
conforms to the "Encapsulated Post Script" (EPS) convention, and it
can be included in a LaTeX document using Rokicki's dvi-to-PostScript
converter dvips.

'-fps'
  Generate PostScript in file'.ps'.

'-fmif'
  Generate maker interchange format in file'.mif'. This can be
imported an manipulated in FrameMaker.

'-fdraw'
  Generate PostScript in file'.draw'. This can be imported and
manipulated in Acorn Draw.

'-g'
 Only availible for PostScript. Create output suitable for the gs
PostScript previewer (or similar). In this case the graph is printed
in portrait mode without scaling. The output is unsuitable for a laser
printer.

'-l'
 Change a biograpfical profile into a life time profile.

'-l' [low] '-' [high]
 Only keep cells with the given lifetime in the heap profile. The
flag is only legal if enough information is available in the hp-file.

'-m'
 Do not show garbage-collection marks.
 
'-p'
 Use previous parameters. By default, the PostScript graph is
automatically scaled both horizontally and vertically so that it fills
the page. However, when preparing a series of graphs for use in a
presentation, it is often useful to draw a new graph using the same
scale, shading and ordering as a previous one. The '-p' flag causes
the graph to be drawn using the parameters determined by a previous
run of hp2graph on a file with the same name as the current one. It is
possible to give a file name directly after '-p' to fetch dimensions
from another auxiliary file (the '.aux' suffix must be explicit).

'-r'
 In order to make graphs more readable, hp2graph sorts the shaded bands for
each identifier. The default sort ordering is for the bands with the largest
area to be stacked on top of the smaller ones. The '-r' option causes
rougher bands (those representing series of values with the largest standard
deviations) to be stacked on top of smoother ones.

'-t'[percentage]
 Bands with smaller percentage of the total area than the given
threshold is ignored. Default is 1%.

'-v'
 Verbose, but not much.

'-x'
 Draw an exploded heap profile

'-y'
 Draw the graph in the traditional York style, witout census lines.

        FILES

hp2graph reads a file with the suffix '.hp', and writes a heap profile
in a file with the same base name and the suffix '.ps' (as default,
see '-f'). The scale and the order of the keys are written to a file
with the suffix '.aux' (as default, see '-p').

        SEE ALSO

dvips(1), latex(1), nhc (1)

C. Runciman and D. Wakeling,
Heap Profiling for Lazy Functional Languages, YCS-172, University of York, 1992


        NOTES
PostScript is a registered trademark of Adobe Systems Incorporated.


        AUTHOR
Niklas Röjemo (with parts stolen from David Wakeling)
